Testing architecture. (#140)
kubewarden/kubewarden-controller: rfc/0003-tests-arch.md

|              |                                  |
| :----------- | :------------------------------- |
| Feature Name | Kubewarden testing architecture  |
| Start Date   | Dec 22th 2021                    |
| Category     | QA                               |
| RFC PR       | [fill this in after opening PR]  |

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Define how, where and whom will trigger, store and run tests for the Kubewarden
stack.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Currently in the Kubewarden project we do not have comprehensive tests which checks

> all the project components together in a automate way. We need to create a testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all the project components together in an automated way. We need to create a testing
```

> architecture that ensure that all changes in any component are tested to work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
architecture that ensures that all changes in any component are tested to work
```

together with the other components of the project. This should happen in a

> automated way with the as lowest overhead for the developer as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automated way with the lowest overhead for a developer as possible.
```

Furthermore, we should provide the minimal infrastructure to run component specific

> tests isolated from the rest of the stack. Thus, allowing the developer run checks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tests isolated from the rest of the stack. Thus, allowing the developer to run checks
```

> ensuring that their changes does not broke something.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensuring that their changes don't break something.
```

## Examples / User Stories
[examples]: #examples

As a developer, I want to run unit tests locally after some code change with
simple commands.

> As a developer, I want to run integration tests to ensure the program continue to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a developer, I want to run integration tests to ensure the program continues to
```

behave as expected locally with simple commands.

As a developer, I want to run the end-to-end tests to ensure that my changes impacting

> multiple Kubewarden stack components does not break some feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
multiple Kubewarden stack components do not break some feature.
```

> As a QA engineer, I want to ensure that developers changes do not break the Kubewarden

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a QA engineer, I want to ensure that developer changes do not break the Kubewarden
```

features.

As QA engineer, I want to ensure that I can add tests with no impact on the
development cycle.

As a Kubewarden maintainer, I want to run all important tests on PR to minimize
the risk of introducing new bugs and regressions.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

In order to ensure the best code and product quality, it is necessary to test a lot.

> In different setup, environments and use cases. To make that reality, we can have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In different setups, environments and use cases. To make that reality, we should have
```

tests in different levels of the development. Which are the following:

## Unit tests

This is the simplest test for developers. We should make the efforts to
add tests for every code changed/added into the repositories of the Kubewarden project.
It should test individual pieces of code using the tools available for each
programming language.

> When implemented the developer should run all the test with a single command like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When implemented, the developer should run all the test with a single command like:
```

```bash
# code code code
make unit-tests
```

These tests should be run on every change in the repository (e.g. push, pull request).

## Component tests

> These are the tests that validates each Kubewarden component behaviour

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are the tests that validate each Kubewarden component behaviour
```

independently from the other stack components.

To test the Kubewarden controller, it's possible to use the test infrastructure

> from Kubebuilder. It's setup an test enviroment to validates the controller

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from Kubebuilder. It setups a test enviroment to validate the controller
```

behaviour using Ginkgo and Gomega. [1](https://github.com/Azure/azure-databricks-operator/blob/0f722a710fea06b86ecdccd9455336ca712bf775/controllers/suite_test.go)
[2](https://github.com/Azure/azure-databricks-operator/blob/0f722a710fea06b86ecdccd9455336ca712bf775/controllers/secretscope_controller_test.go)
[3](https://book.kubebuilder.io/cronjob-tutorial/writing-tests.html)

For the policy server and other Rust components, we can use the language features
to integrations tests.[3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/testing/integration_testing.html)

> When implemented the developer should run all the test with a single command like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When implemented, the developer should run all the test with a single command like:
```

```bash
# code code code
make acceptance-tests
# or
make integration-tests
```

These tests should also run on every change proposed in the component
repository (e.g. push, pull request).

## End-to-end tests

These are the most complex tests. They will simulate what Kubewarden users will

> do to install, upgrade, configure and possibly uninstall Kubewarden stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
do to install, upgrade, configure and possibly uninstall the Kubewarden stack.
```

> In these tests, different components versions would be tested together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these tests, different component versions would be tested together.
```

Therefore, ensuring that the user will not face issues when using different

> components configuration and versions together. This should ensure that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
component configurations and versions together. This should ensure that
```

Kubernetes operator will have the expected features working.

> These tests are trigger when we have new releases (or release candidate) of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These tests are triggered when we have new releases (or release candidate) of
```

> any of the Kubewarden stack.  It should follow some steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
any part of the Kubewarden stack.  It should follow some steps:
```

1. Setup Kubernetes cluster
  Kubewarden is expected to run in multiple Kubernetes versions and machine
  architectures. So, the end-to-end tests should ensure that all the supported
  versions and architectures are tested.
2. Install Kuberwarden stack on the cluster from step 1
  The version to be tested should be installed. This means that when a component

>   is released. It should be tested against all the other components versions which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is released, it should be tested against all the other components versions which
```

  it supposed to work together.
3. Run basic end-to-end tests
  Validate if the basic features are working as expected
4. Run reconfiguration tests

>   Validates if the user is able to reconfigure a Kubewarden stack installed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Validates if the user is able to reconfigure an installed Kubewarden stack
```

5. Run upgrade tests
  Validate if the user is able to upgrade and continue to work with the latest release.

> Steps 3,4 and 5 may run in parallel.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? They can run in parallel in different environments, or acting in the same environment? I think it's best to start with a simple baseline, where reconfigurations do not happen along with upgrades.

Author: I mean that we can run in 3 different clusters. Each one runs different set of tests (steps 3,4,5)

Considering the tests will validate multiple components of the Kubewarden stack

> together, it desirable to keep all the end-to-end test files in a separated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
together, it is desirable to keep all the end-to-end test files in a separate
```

repository. This repository should contains all the yaml files, scripts, and
helper code to run the tests. This also helps to avoid duplicating tests that
validate some feature that impacts multiple components.

The end-to-end tests repository should be independent. Which means that it should
run the tests independently of the tests and development cycle of the other
Kubewarden repositories. But every time a new component release is available
for testing, the end-to-end tests should be trigger automatically with no human
intervention.  Besides that, running the end-to-end test on demand and in pre defined
periods is also desirable.

We could also configure the end-to-end tests to run against the latest version of

> all Kubewarden components. Thus, spotting some possible issues before a official

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all Kubewarden components. Thus, spotting some possible issues before an official
```

release candidate.

Considering the high workload nature of the end-to-end tests it may be necessary
run them in a dedicated runner outside from Github hosted runners. From past
experiences, the runners from Github could be slow and the tests failed due
timeout issues.

This tests can be written using bash and frameworks similar to [bats](https://github.com/bats-core/bats-core/).

The developers should be able to run the same end-to-end tests locally with simple
commands like:

```bash
# in the end-to-end test respository directory
make test
```

## Policy tests

It's also desirable to have tests to validate policies behaviour. So, it is
necessary provide policy authors some tools to help them testing their policies.
There is an initial [tool](https://github.com/kubewarden/setup-kubewarden-cluster-action)
for that. It's a Github action which creates a K3D cluster and installs Kubewarden

> on it.

Reviewer 2: I would like to experiment a little with a well-known structure for test cases/expected responses in policies trees.

If we settle on a common tree structure for tests and expected results on policies, it would be straightforward to implement something along the lines of `kwctl test`, where one can run inside a policy folder, and get all those e2e tests *for the policy* executed by kwctl.

I'm derailing from the main goal of this RFC though.

Author: I'm not sure if forcing the user to follow a tree structure to run tests is a good idea. It does not seem flexible to me. Furthermore, what's the advantage of this against the whole universe of tests frameworks with a lot more features that they can use?

Reviewer 2: The idea would be that policies can have a well known folder structure that could have test cases in an automated way. The main advantage of having this structure on all policies would be that besides being e2e tests they also serve as documentation for policy users.

Also, we could integrate the Kubewarden Hub so it can link directly to the test directory, and even in the future show them in a different way in the UI, so they serve as the real documentation of the policy. I think is superior than README.md based documentation that can get easily out of date. e2e tests serve both for validating the policy does what I expect, and to let me know how the policy works.

Reviewer 2: If a certain policy wants to ignore this structure and perform its own way of e2e testing it's perfectly fine, only that the integration with the UI and "e2e tests as policy documentation for free" would not work out of the box for that policy.

It helps to have a more consistent story around policies. No matter their language, framework...

Reviewer 3: I agree in coming up with a well-known structure for test cases/expected responses. In fact, I would like that structure to be applicable to all parts of the project, not only kwctl/policies.

I think the biggest problem with a production CI is coming up with an interface for it between the CI logic (local debugger) and all the different projects that form Kubewarden. The rest (whether we use bats, a different test framework, or several depending on the task) should be interchangeable.

The local debugger interfaces with each of the tests or each kubewarden component (policy-server, kwctl, controller, policies..) in a specific way. And the local debugger loop needs to keep working, no matter if it is asked to run against a tuple of old versions of components, a tuple of the latest components, or a mix. This protects us about needing to backport CI testcases, or do weird things in the future, once we have several versions released and receiving support. It protects us from needing to redo parts of the Github Actions workflows if we want to 

IMHO, this is the most difficult question to answer, as it freezes the interface, and makes us commit to an architecture. These kind of questions are the important ones. Other kind of questions, where one can iterate/backtrack or substitute things in the architecture without changing its interface, are "easy" questions.

I would like to answer the following questions:

- How do I known what tuple of Kubewarden components (kwctl, policy-server, controller, policies, etc) is currently under test? Which commit hash? how to add more to the list, or substitute one?
- Where are the testcases for tests related to only 1 component? (I suppose in the repo of the component under test)
- Where are the testcases for tests that exercise several components (maybe in a repo of a component that depends on both? in a different repo?)
- How do I add tests so they can be reviewed together with the new feature that enables it? Easy if tests are in the repo of the component, just add them to the PR. What happens in other cases?
- How does the debugger engine loop (a simple logic loop) go through all the components and triggers their testscases? How does it call them? How does it get info back that they passed? How does it print errors? How does it skip some if needed?
- How can we make sure that I can refactor the tests of 1 component to use a different test framework (from bats to ginkgo, for example), without needing to change anything besides that component repo?
- How can I use `git bisect` between different tuples of components?

Author: ```
I agree in coming up with a well-known structure for test cases/expected responses. In fact, I would like that structure to be applicable to all parts of the project, not only kwctl/policies.

I think the biggest problem, from my past experiences, with a production CI is coming up with an interface for it between the CI logic (local debugger) and all the different projects that form Kubewarden. The rest of questions don't freeze the interface (whether we use bats, a different test framework, or several depending on the task).

The local debugger interfaces in a specific way with each of the tests or each kubewarden component (policy-server, kwctl, controller, policies..) that it depends on. The local debugger loop needs to keep working, no matter if it is asked to run against a tuple of old versions of components, a tuple of the latest components, or a mix. This protects us about needing to backport testcases, or do weird things in the future, once we have several versions released and receiving support.

The local debugger also provides an external interface, so one can run it locally or via a scheduler (GH Actions). This interface needs to be frozen too, as it protects us from needing to redo parts of the Github Actions workflows on components or backporting changes to the debugger, on old branches of components already released.

IMHO, the most difficult questions to answer, are the ones that freeze the interfaces of the local debugger:

-   the internal one to each component and its testcases
-   the external one that gets used by schedulers (git bisect, GH Actions..)  
    Those make us commit to an architecture. These kind of questions are the important ones, and the other ones are "easy" questions, as we don't have the need to get it right early, and we can iterate on the solutions.
```

I understand the concerns and I agree with you (afaics, this is a common issue in the industry. I find  a similar complain about that in an article from this [repo](https://github.com/asatarin/testing-distributed-systems)). But I think we should keep something in mind, the tests will require some maintenance. I do not think that they will work forever without some care. Trying to minimize this overhead we can start prioritizing  unit tests  and component level . 

Let's add more complex E2E testing in the future after we mature how to approach this using this script locally during development (Does it make sense?). To reflect that, I can update the E2E section to express this or simple remove it completely.  Otherwise, if we start without a clear way to do things, it will be a excuse to not adding tests or ignoring them if they fail.

```
I would like to answer the following questions:

-   How do I known what tuple of Kubewarden components (kwctl, policy-server, controller, policies, etc) is currently under test? Which commit hash? how to add more to the list, or substitute one?
```
I do not expect you define the commit hash version for the E2E tests. These tests should simulate the user usage. So, they will not allow the developer to define this level of granularity. What you should be able to do is to define the container images used to deploy the Kubewarden stack (e.g. changing the helm chart configuration). However, you can try individual commits if you publish a container image for that commit somewhere and change the helm chart value to use that container image.
```
-   How do I known what tuple of Kubewarden components (kwctl, policy-server, controller, policies, etc) is currently under test? Which commit hash? how to add more to the list, or substitute one?
```
 As E2E simulates the user, it's not expected to allow specific the commit version for all the components. You will be allowed to specific the container image as we do in the helm charts and yaml files.  We can even change the script to configure this values on the fly something like:
 ```bash
 POLICY_SERVER_VERSION=v0.2.5 make runtests
 # or
 POLICY_SERVER_IMAGE=ghrc.io/user/policy-server:afqwgrnad make runtests
 ```

```
-   Where are the testcases for tests related to only 1 component? (I suppose in the repo of the component under test)
```
Yes. If the test is exclusively for one component it's not necessary to add it in the E2E tests repo. Of course, You can add tests in the E2E to add an extra level of testing. But this will not test the fix at "low" level. You will add the test to validate the behavior of updated component together with the whole stack.  
```
-   Where are the testcases for tests that exercise several components (maybe in a repo of a component that depends on both? in a different repo?)
```
If you want to exercise how different components work together,  add some E2E tests for the feature in the E2E tests repository. I do not thing this is necessary for all the features. But this exercise will test how the components behave together. It will NOT validate how the communication between them happens.  
```
-   How does the debugger engine loop (a simple logic loop) go through all the components and triggers their testscases? How does it call them? How does it get info back that they passed? How does it print errors? How does it skip some if needed
```
That will depend on what we will use to develop tests. Currently, we are using `bats` which already handle all of these for us. If we decided to go with pure shell, we need to implement that by ourselves. If we decided to use different libraries, we can use what their provide.
```
-   How can we make sure that I can refactor the tests of 1 component to use a different test framework (from bats to ginkgo, for example), without needing to change anything besides that component repo?
```
For the component repo, as long as the developer abstracts the two different test frameworks under a helper script or Makefile target, I do not see that as a problem. If the first test suite fails, skip the next one. I do not see the need of unify the test results outputs for now. If the tests passed, great. If it fails, the execution will stop before start the next test suite written in another test framework. 
```
-   How can I use `git bisect` between different tuples of components?
```
For the component test (those one living in the component repo), It should work out of the box.

For the E2E test, it uses versions available somewhere. So, if you are running a bisect,  you can publish the version under the bisect somewhere (probably a registry) and refer it in the E2E tests scripts as described in your first two questions.

Reviewer 3: > Let's add more complex E2E testing in the future after we mature how to approach this using this script locally during development (Does it make sense?). To reflect that, I can update the E2E section to express this or simple remove it completely. 

I'm fine with that. I suppose we would need a follow-up RFC for e2e-tests in the future. But I would like to point that the e2e-tests are the only ones that must have a defined backwards-compatible interface before being on production.

> Yes. If the test is exclusively for one component it's not necessary to add it in the E2E tests repo

As an example of what I meant, https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller/pull/139/files is a feat PR that contains `e2e-tests/test-verification/`. This made it simple to explain what was expected from the feature, and to iterate on the implementation 3 times on the PR.

> For the component repo, as long as the developer abstracts the two different test frameworks under a helper script or Makefile target, I do not see that as a problem. 

That sounds like the interface I want specified: "a repo must have a `make e2e-tests` makefile target that succeeds with retcode 0 if all tests pass". And then the debugger can run those for each repo, in a specific order. We can then write a simple linter to make sure we never deviate from the interface, and break `git bisect`, GH Actions, etc in the future.

> For the E2E test, it uses versions available somewhere. So, if you are running a bisect, you can publish the version under the bisect somewhere (probably a registry)

I would like to define that place for the interface. Is it a config file in the e2e-tests repo, a registry, does it accept both, a mix?

As a side note, I think that we are seeing 2 approaches, you would like the "interface" to be defined organically by the implementation of the e2e tests, and I would like to specify it beforehand.

Author: What do you think about start by trying the following idea and iterating over it? 

- For PRs we follow the @ereslibre suggestion and run the e2e test using some kind of GH action (probable defined in the `kubewarden-end-to-end-tests` repository) 
 - For local debugging, we do something similar of it's done `kubewarden-controller`. In the `mate e2e-test` script we download the e2e tests locally (no sub-modules for now) and run them using the same interface used by the GH action. Just to clarify, the `kubewarden-controller` does not download tests from another repository, but it [download a script to setup the test env locally](https://github.com/kubewarden/kubewarden-controller/blob/main/Makefile#L59-L62) from another repository (provided by controller-runtime).

Author: @viccuad I've updated the RFC adding an idea of how to run the e2e tests from other repositories defining some interface to allow this integration. Can you review it?

The policy templates should be updated to have a template workflow file with
the basic steps to setup the test infrastructure.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> * We need considerable initial effort to build the test infrastructure

Reviewer 2: One thing that I believe is relevant is that while e2e tests are totally desirable, it's a good approach to keep them to a minimum that is relevant for us.

In general, unit and integration tests, being closer to the code are more explicit about their failures, easier to track what's wrong. e2e tests while checking the "big picture" aren't usually very explicit into what and where went wrong exactly -- and it's fine, is not their goal --.

Just for consideration: https://blog.znsio.com/2011/02/01/inverting-the-testing-pyramid/ in terms of how many and what weight the different test types should ideally have.

Author: Yes, I agree. Most of our effort should be in the unit and components tests. That's one of the reasons I consider component tests different from the end-to-end tests. 

However, we should run the basic end-to-end tests to validate the versions work fine together. But it will still require a considerable amount of effort due to the matrix of possibilities that we will validate.

together, it desirable to keep all the end-to-end test files in a separated
repository. This repository should contains all the yaml files, scripts, and
helper code to run the tests. This also helps to avoid duplicating tests that
validate some feature that impacts multiple components.

The end-to-end tests repository should be independent. Which means that it should
run the tests independently of the tests and development cycle of the other
Kubewarden repositories. But every time a new component release is available
for testing, the end-to-end tests should be trigger automatically with no human
intervention.  Besides that, running the end-to-end test on demand and in pre defined
periods is also desirable.

We could also configure the end-to-end tests to run against the latest version of
all Kubewarden components. Thus, spotting some possible issues before a official
release candidate.

Considering the high workload nature of the end-to-end tests it may be necessary
run them in a dedicated runner outside from Github hosted runners. From past
experiences, the runners from Github could be slow and the tests failed due
timeout issues.

> This tests can be written using bash and frameworks similar to [bats](https://github.com/bats-core/bats-core/).

Author: I understand the concern and I agree with reling on a specific tools. I've proposed bats because two main reasons:
1. We already use it in some repositories
2. Some time ago, we was talking about writing the tests using bash. Even if I'm not big fan of bash for this, if we decided to follow this path, we will need tools already created by bats. So, we will not reinvent the weel.

However, if we could use the Rancher testing infrastructure we can check how they run their tests and use the same tools. Thus, we can use the same infra already in place (considering that we have access to this infra).

> This tests can be written using bash and frameworks similar to [bats](https://github.com/bats-core/bats-core/).

Reviewer 4: Ok, let's leave `bats` in the document. Please merge the grammar fixes :heart:

|              |                                  |
| :----------- | :------------------------------- |
| Feature Name | Kubewarden testing architecture  |
| Start Date   | Dec 22th 2021                    |
| Category     | QA                               |
| RFC PR       | [fill this in after opening PR]  |

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

Define how, where and whom will trigger, store and run tests for the Kubewarden
stack.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Currently in the Kubewarden project we do not have comprehensive tests which checks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently in the Kubewarden project we do not have comprehensive tests which check
```

> all the project components together in a automate way. We need to create a testing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
all the project components together in a automated way. We need to create a testing
```

architecture that ensure that all changes in any component are tested to work

> together with the other components of the project. This should happen in a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
together with the other components of the project. This should happen in an
```

> automated way with the as lowest overhead for the developer as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
automated way with the lowest possible overhead for the developer.
```

Furthermore, we should provide the minimal infrastructure to run component specific
tests isolated from the rest of the stack. Thus, allowing the developer run checks
ensuring that their changes does not broke something.

## Examples / User Stories
[examples]: #examples

As a developer, I want to run unit tests locally after some code change with
simple commands.

As a developer, I want to run integration tests to ensure the program continue to
behave as expected locally with simple commands.

As a developer, I want to run the end-to-end tests to ensure that my changes impacting
multiple Kubewarden stack components does not break some feature.

As a QA engineer, I want to ensure that developers changes do not break the Kubewarden
features.

As QA engineer, I want to ensure that I can add tests with no impact on the
development cycle.

As a Kubewarden maintainer, I want to run all important tests on PR to minimize

> the risk of introducing new bugs and regressions.

Reviewer 2: I like every single user story here. I think they also cover all relevant cases, except one.

We also want to ensure, as "Kubewarden maintainers" that existing policies keep working on new releases (e2e test) as they are expected to without any modification.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

In order to ensure the best code and product quality, it is necessary to test a lot.

> In different setup, environments and use cases. To make that reality, we can have

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In different setups, environments and use cases. To make that reality, we can have
```

tests in different levels of the development. Which are the following:

## Unit tests

This is the simplest test for developers. We should make the efforts to
add tests for every code changed/added into the repositories of the Kubewarden project.
It should test individual pieces of code using the tools available for each
programming language.

> When implemented the developer should run all the test with a single command like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When implemented, the developer should run all the test with a single command like:
```

```bash
# code code code
make unit-tests
```

These tests should be run on every change in the repository (e.g. push, pull request).

## Component tests

These are the tests that validates each Kubewarden component behaviour
independently from the other stack components.

To test the Kubewarden controller, it's possible to use the test infrastructure
from Kubebuilder. It creates a test environment to validates the controller
behaviour using Ginkgo and Gomega. [1](https://github.com/Azure/azure-databricks-operator/blob/0f722a710fea06b86ecdccd9455336ca712bf775/controllers/suite_test.go)
[2](https://github.com/Azure/azure-databricks-operator/blob/0f722a710fea06b86ecdccd9455336ca712bf775/controllers/secretscope_controller_test.go)
[3](https://book.kubebuilder.io/cronjob-tutorial/writing-tests.html)

For the policy server and other Rust components, we can use the language features

> to integrations tests.[3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/testing/integration_testing.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for integrations tests.[3](https://doc.rust-lang.org/rust-by-example/testing/integration_testing.html)
```

> When implemented the developer should run all the test with a single command like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When implemented the developer should run all the tests with a single command like:
```

```bash
# code code code
make acceptance-tests
# or
make integration-tests
```

These tests should also run on every change proposed in the component
repository (e.g. push, pull request).

## End-to-end tests

These are the most complex tests. They will simulate what Kubewarden users will

> do to install, upgrade, configure and possibly uninstall Kubewarden stack.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
do to install, upgrade, configure and uninstall Kubewarden stack.
```

In these tests, different components versions would be tested together.
Therefore, ensuring that the user will not face issues when using different
components configuration and versions together. This should ensure that
Kubernetes operator will have the expected features working.

> These tests are trigger when we have new releases (or release candidate) of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These tests are triggered when we have new releases (or release candidate) of
```

> any of the Kubewarden stack.  It should follow some steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
any of the Kubewarden stack components.  It should follow some steps:
```

1. Setup Kubernetes cluster
  Kubewarden is expected to run in multiple Kubernetes versions and machine
  architectures. So, the end-to-end tests should ensure that all the supported
  versions and architectures are tested. The initial versions of the tests can
  be simple in a single arch and version.

> 2. Install Kuberwarden stack on the cluster from step 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Install the Kuberwarden stack on the cluster from step 1
```

  The version to be tested should be installed. This means that when a component
  is released. It should be tested against all the other components versions which
it is supposed to work together.
3. Run basic end-to-end tests
  Validate if the basic features are working as expected
4. Run reconfiguration tests
  Validates if the user is able to reconfigure a Kubewarden stack installed
5. Run upgrade tests
  Validate if the user is able to upgrade and continue to work with the latest release.

Steps 3,4 and 5 may run in parallel when necessary (e.g. time to execute all tests

> is to long)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is too long)
```

Considering the tests will validate multiple components of the Kubewarden stack
together (controller and Policy Server), it desirable to keep all the

> end-to-end test files in a separated repository. This repository should contains

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
end-to-end test files in a separated repository. This repository should contain
```

all the yaml files, scripts, and helper code to run the tests. This also helps
to avoid duplicating tests that validate some feature that impacts multiple
components.

The end-to-end tests repository should be independent. Which means that it should
run the tests independently of the tests and development cycle of the other
Kubewarden repositories. But every time a new component release is available
for testing, the end-to-end tests should be triggered automatically with no human
intervention.  Besides that, running the end-to-end test on demand and in pre defined
periods is also desirable.

We could also configure the end-to-end tests to run against the latest version of

> all Kubewarden components. Thus, spotting some possible issues before a official

Reviewer 2: I think we should also have a nightly job from all components in `main`, that can spot failures during the development cycle, acting as a canary.
